[IDP Docs] Refactor Workflows (#9272)
harness/developer-hub: docs/internal-developer-portal/flows/worflowyaml.md

---

> title: Understanding Worfklow YAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Understanding Workflow YAML
```

Reviewer: common mistake :) let's use a spell checker in vscode

description: Get started with creating your Workflows using the Workflow YAML configuration. 
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: YAML
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Workflows are stored in the Software Catalog under the kind **“Template”.** You can create and configure your own workflows in Harness IDP using a YAML file typically named **```workflow.yaml```.** This YAML file acts as the single source of truth, describing the workflow and its metadata. Below is an overview of its configuration.

> ## What is  ```workflow.yaml```?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What is `workflow.yaml`?
```

There is no gap between is and workflow.yaml in the rendered version. If it's due to code blocks, you can use `Workflow YAML` instead of `workflow.yaml`. "Workflow YAML definition" would be the full phrase.

Author: Makes sense, will do.

> A workflow is defined through a YAML configuration file, usually named ```workflow.yaml```, which contains all the workflow’s metadata. This file resides in the root directory of the source code repository in your connected Git provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A workflow is defined through a YAML configuration file, usually named ```workflow.yaml```, which contains all the workflow’s metadata.
```

Reviewer: it can live anywhere

Author: noted

> The syntax and guidelines for writing this YAML configuration file are governed by Backstage. Learn more about the [backstage guidelines](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-templates/writing-templates/#specparameters---formstep--formstep) here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax and guidelines for writing this YAML configuration file are inspired by Backstage Templates. Learn more about the [Backstage guidelines](https://backstage.io/docs/features/software-templates/writing-templates/#specparameters---formstep--formstep) here.
```

> ## Components of  ```workflow.yaml```

Reviewer: same comment as above

The ```workflow.yaml``` has three main components:
1. **Frontend**: Configures the input fields required for the workflow.
2. **Backend**: Configures the actions to be triggered and the orchestration pipelines to be executed.
3. **Outputs**: Configures output variables to be used after backend execution.

![](./static/workflows-mindmap.png)

These components work together to facilitate workflow execution. Let’s dive deeper into each.

### [Workflow Frontend](/docs/internal-developer-portal/flows/flows-input.md) 
The frontend of Harness IDP workflows is customizable to accept different types of input fields based on custom requirements. This frontend serves as the entry point, where users fill in the necessary details to execute the workflow using the input parameters described.

#### How to define the Workflow Frontend?

> - You can configure the frontend using the ```spec.parameters``` field in your YAML configuration. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can configure one or more pages of input fields in the frontend using the ```spec.parameters``` field in your YAML configuration. 
```

- You can define multiple input fields using the `properties` field in your YAML configuration.

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="YAML" label="YAML" default>

**Example Syntax**:
```YAML
spec:
  owner: backstage/techdocs-core
  type: service

  parameters:
    - title: A registration form
      description: A simple form example.
      type: object
      required:
        - firstName
        - lastName
      properties:
        firstName:
          type: string
          title: First name
          default: Chuck
        lastName:
          type: string
          title: Last name
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="Workflow Playground" label="Template Playground">

![](./static/template-editor-wofrkflowyaml.png)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

**Parameter Types**

A workflow definition can accept a wide range of input types, including:
- **String**: Simple text fields used for names, IDs, or environment types.
- **Integer**: Numeric inputs used for values like quotas or age limits.
- **Array**: Useful for handling multiple inputs, such as a list of dependencies or services.

> - **Object**: Enables complex data structures, allowing nested fields for detailed configurations.

Reviewer: Object makes sense from the framework perspective. Not very helpful for users. See https://rjsf.netlify.app/ and https://docs.port.io/actions-and-automations/create-self-service-experiences/setup-ui-for-action/user-inputs/array for inspiration of the input types.

Author: Noted, will do.

:::

Harness IDP also provides a **built-in editor** to help you build your **Workflow's Frontend**. It offers a real-time preview of the corresponding UI based on the YAML definition. Here, you can create a new workflow or edit an existing one.  '

**Note:** The editor is for **preview purposes** only; changes made here cannot be saved. Once you have tested the modifications, you must manually copy the updated YAML and add it to the Workflow definition YAML stored in your Git provider.  

Here's how you can access the playground: 
1. Go to your **Workflows** page. Click on the **three dots** in the top right corner and select **Open Playground**.
![](./static/template-editor-1.png)
2. Select **Edit Template Form**. 
![](./static/template-editoer-2.png)
3. Choose an existing workflow or begin creating a new one.
![](./static/template-editor-3.png)

## Syntax Essentials

### Input Parameters
The input fields in **parameters** can be structured sequentially. Since it accepts an array, you can either have all input fields on a single page or divide them into multiple pages, rendering them as different steps in the form.  

> These fields are built using the [**React JSON Schema**](https://github.com/rjsf-team/react-jsonschema-form) library. Additionally, the library includes an option called **`uiSchema`**, which we have integrated by merging it with the existing **JSON Schema** you provide. This allows for enhanced UI customization using `ui:*` properties, which can be seen in the step definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These fields are built using the [**React JSON Schema**](https://rjsf.netlify.app) library. The library includes many fields which can be used with the `ui:field` property of an input field. `ui:options` in the same field are used to customize the field behavior.
```

<details>
<summary>Example YAML</summary>

```YAML
apiVersion: scaffolder.backstage.io/v1beta3
kind: Template
metadata:
  name: v1beta3-demo
  title: Test Action Workflow
  description: Workflow Demo
spec:
  owner: backstage/techdocs-core
  type: service
  parameters:
    - title: A registration form
      description: A simple form example.
      type: object
      required:
        - firstName
        - lastName
      properties:
        firstName:
          type: string
          title: First name
          default: Chuck
          ui:autofocus: true
          ui:emptyValue: ''
          ui:autocomplete: given-name
        lastName:
          type: string
          title: Last name
          ui:emptyValue: ''
          ui:autocomplete: family-name
        nicknames:
          type: array
          items:
            type: string
          ui:options:
          orderable: false
        telephone:
          type: string
          title: Telephone
          minLength: 10
          ui:options:
            inputType: tel
# ... pipeline details will follow
```

</details>

> ### Templating Syntax

Reviewer: Let's be careful with the syntax here. The syntax used in steps uses `${{ }}` while parameters use `{{ }}`. In Q4, we are introducing a lot of parameter templating with our features.

Variables in **Workflow YAML** are wrapped in `${{ }}` and are used to connect different parts of the workflow. All form inputs from the **parameters** section can be accessed using this syntax.  

For example, `${{ parameters.project_name }}` inserts the value of `project_name` entered by the user in the UI. This allows seamless passing of values from the form into different workflow steps, making input variables reusable. These strings retain the type of the parameter.  

The `${{ parameters.project_name }}` pattern is specifically used in **Workflow YAML** to pass parameters from the UI to the input of the `trigger:harness-custom-pipeline` step.  

The templating engine used for this YAML is **[Nunjucks](https://mozilla.github.io/nunjucks/)**.

**Important Note:**  

> The `${{ parameters.x }}` syntax is supported only within the **steps** section when configuring the **Workflows Backend**. It **cannot** be used within the **properties** section to reference another parameter.

Reviewer: It's not like it can't be used. Parameters value from one page can be used in separate pages. Parameters from one page can be used in our dynamic picker in the same page.

Get this verified by Deba and Deepesh, please.

Author: Oh got it. This was taken directly from the previous docs, I will check this with Deba and Deepesh. Thank you for pointing this out.
